---
title: API 1.13 (Companion 4.1+)
sidebar_position: -113
---

### Variables in `textinput` fields are now automatically parsed {#variable-parsing}

You no longer need to call `parseVariablesInString` in most circumstances. Any `textinput` field with `useVariables` defined will automatically have variables parsed before the action/feedback is called.

Any `parseVariablesInString` calls you are doing on these fields is now a no-op and can be removed.

:::note

If you are parsing any non textinput fields, these will not be auto-parsed.

:::

:::tip

This is groundwork to better allow us to handle expressions for you, expect more to change around this in future releases.

:::

### Value-type feedbacks (support for local variables) {#value-feedbacks}

As part of the new local variables support in Companion, you can now define `value` feedbacks. These are similar to `boolean` feedbacks, but you can return any type of value.

Within Companion, the user is able to store the value you provide into a local variable. They can also do this with `boolean` feedbacks, but `boolean` feedbacks can also be used directly in styling a button, a `value` feedback cannot

### `options:` improvements: new `description` field; multiline `textinput` field; "infinity" bounds for `number` fields {#new-options}

Every field can now specify a `description`. This is intended to be a some hint to the user that should always be visible, and gets shown below the input field.

The `textinput` field type can now request to be multiline. This will provide a single string, with `\n` characters where the user added a line break

The `number` field type can opt to show the defined min or max values as infinity. This is common behaviour for audio mixers, where they treat some low value such as -90 as -infinity

### `secret-text` field-type for Configs {#secrets}

There is a new `secret-text` field type available to the connection config panel.

This is intended to allow for us to better track what config values are secret and might want to be omitted from some exports.

These get provided to your module as another parameter to the `init` and `configUpdated` methods.

:::tip

Make sure to not mix them, or it defeats the purpose of them being separate

:::

### subscribe/unsubscribe: More flexibility for Action/ less for feedbacks {#subscribe}

Actions can opt out of their unsubscribe method being called when the options change.

They can also specify which options should not trigger a call to subscribe/unsubscribe, allowing you to filter out noisey/excessive calls.

Feedback subscrube/unsubscribe callbacks are no longer called for every options change, as this happens every time the options or a variable inside the options changes.
